Update monitoring to actually include everything needed (#1527)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/admin/tutorials/monitoring/tutorial.md

>
{: .agenda}

> This tutorial explicitly assumes you are starting from a setup like what was created in the *Galaxy installation with Ansible* tutorial.

Author: ```suggestion
This tutorial explicitly assumes you are starting with a setup like that created in the *Galaxy installation with Ansible* tutorial
```

# Data Flow

The monitoring setup we (UseGalaxy.\*) use involves compute nodes collecting metrics and forwarding the data to a central collector. On each node we have a data collector running (Telegraf) which collects data from numerous sources before aggregating it and forwarding it onwards. On another, sometimes public, node we accept and collect all of these metrics (InfluxDB) and provide an interface to visualise and query that data (Grafana).

For UseGalaxy.eu, we pre-install Telegraf on our compute node images. Whenever we launch new compute nodes, they automatically start sending data to our central collection point. Telegraf additionally provides a nice feature of aggregating metrics it collects, batching them up before sending them off to InfluxDB. Telegraf has built in data collectors, or can run command line scripts and tools which output specifically formatted data.

Telegraf communicates with InfluxDB using a JSON based HTTP API, making it easy to write custom tooling to send data there, if need be. Grafana provides the visualisation component, the most interesting component for most consumers of the metrics and monitoring.

# Infrastructure

> Setting up the infrastructure is quite simple thanks to the automation provided by Ansible. We will first setup a playbook for a "monitoring" machine where our data collection and visualisation, and then we will expand the Galaxy playbook to include Telegraf to monitor the machine and collect data on Galaxy. In this tutorial we will do everything on the same machine. In practice you can separate these services to different machines, if you wish. The only requirement is that Telegraf run on the machine from which you wish to collect data.

Author: ```suggestion
Setting up the infrastructure is quite simple thanks to the automation provided by Ansible. We will first setup a playbook for a "monitoring" machine, which will collect and visualize our data using InfluxDB and Grafana. We will then expand the Galaxy playbook to include Telegraf on the machine to monitor both it and Galaxy itself. In this tutorial we will do everything on the same machine. In practice you can separate these services to different machines, if you wish. The only requirement is that Telegraf run on the machine from which you wish to collect data.
```

## InfluxDB

[InfluxDB](https://www.influxdata.com/) provides the data storage for monitoring. It is a <abbr title="Time Series Database">TSDB</abbr>, so it has been designed specifically for storing time-series data like monitoring and metrics. There are other TSBD options for storing data but we have had good experiences with this one. TSBDs commonly feature some form of automatic data expiration after a set period of time. In InfluxDB these are known as "retention policies". Outside of this feature, it is a [relatively normal database](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.7/concepts/crosswalk/).

> The available Ansible roles for InfluxDB unfortunately do not support configuring databases or users or retention policies. Ansible itself contains [several modules](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/list_of_database_modules.html#influxdb) you can use to write your own roles, but nothing generic. UseGalaxy.eu wrote [their own role](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/infrastructure-playbook/blob/master/roles/hxr.influxdb/tasks/main.yml) for setting up their database, but this is not reusable enough that it has been split out into a separate role yet. If you plan to automate your entire setup, this can perhaps provide inspiration for writing your own role. Otherwise it is sufficient to manually create your users and retention policies as a one-off task.

Author: ```suggestion
The available Ansible roles for InfluxDB unfortunately do not support configuring databases or users or retention policies. Ansible itself contains [several modules](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/list_of_database_modules.html#influxdb) you can use to write your own roles, but nothing generic. UseGalaxy.eu wrote [their own role](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/infrastructure-playbook/blob/master/roles/hxr.influxdb/tasks/main.yml) for setting up their InfluxDB database, but it is not reusable enough for it to be used here yet. If you plan to automate your entire setup, this tutorial can perhaps provide inspiration for writing your own Ansible role. However, in this case it is sufficient to manually create your users and retention policies as a one-off task.```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Setting up InfluxDB
>
> 1. Edit your `requirements.yml` and add the following:
>
>    ```yaml
>    - src: mtchavez.influxdb
>      version: v6.0.0
>    ```
>
> 2. `ansible-galaxy install -p roles -r requirements.yml`
>
> 3. Create a new playbook, `monitoring.yml` with the following:
>
>    ```yaml
>    ---
>    - hosts: monitoring
>      become: true
>      roles:
>        - mtchavez.influxdb
>    ```
>
>    During this tutorial we will install everything on the same host, but often one keeps the monitoring infrastructure (Grafana, InfluxDB) on a separate host.
>
> 4. Edit the inventory file (`hosts`) an add a group for monitoring like:
>
>    ```ini
>    [monitoring]
>    training-0.example.org ansible_connection=local
>    ```
>

> >    Ensure that the hostname is the full hostname of your machine.

Author: ```suggestion
>    **Ensure that the hostname is the full hostname of your machine.**
```

>
> 4. Run the playbook:
>
>    ```
>    ansible-playbook -i hosts monitoring.yml
>    ```
>
{: .hands_on}

This will setup an InfluxDB server listening on port `:8086`. The service is currently unauthenticated but it is only listening on `localhost` so it is less of a concern. The service can be authenticated and SSL configured quite easily but that is outside the scope of this tutorial.

You can access the InfluxDB service by running the command `influx`.

```
$ influx
Connected to http://localhost:8086 version 1.7.7
InfluxDB shell version: 1.7.7
> show databases
name: databases
name
----
_internal
> use _internal
Using database _internal
> show measurements
name: measurements
name
----
cq
database
httpd
queryExecutor
runtime
shard
subscriber
tsm1_cache
tsm1_engine
tsm1_filestore
tsm1_wal
write
```

> This provides commands like `show databases` and others, but we will not use this interface very often. Telegraf will automatically try to create any database needed, and no interaction is required to setup Grafana to talk to the database.

Author: ```suggestion
The `influx` command provides command line access to InfluxDB in a similar fashion to `psql` for Postgresql. It provides commands like `show databases` and others, but we will not use this interface very often. Telegraf will automatically try to create any database needed, and no interaction is required to setup Grafana to talk to the database.
```

thanks, analogy here is a good idea!

## Grafana

> [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) provides a visual interface to our metrics. It provides a nice query builder that provides a uniform experience across multiple backend databases, and many attractive graphing options. Another benefit is that many of the UseGalaxy.\* servers share their publish their dashboards publicly, and you can easily copy these and use them on your own server.

Author: definitely needed too, thanks!
